# Navy

### Movement by water
Water movement can be along coasts, or rivers, or into open sea zones, or out of open sea zones. Barques are not allowed into open sea zones. Roundships are not allowed to sail along rivers. Barques may carry 100 units of cargo. Galliots may carry 300. Caravels may carry 500. Roundships may carry 1,000. Galleys may carry 2,000. In water movement, cannons count as 100 units of cargo, falconets as three, light cavalry as three, horses as two, heavy cavalry as four, crew and troops count as one, and all other trade goods count as one unit of cargo. Speed is doubled when a fleet includes no galleys, barques or galliots. Galleys require 100 crew. Galliots and caravels require 20. Roundships require 50. Barques require 10. Overloaded ships may not move.

In movement by water, basic speed is four leagues per hour. When barques, galliots or galleys are included, basic speed is two leagues per hour. In both cases, effective speed is equal to basic speed multiplied by navigation skill divided by 1,000. 


## Barque
Barques are ships used for 'riverine' and 'coastal' transport. They are not allowed to engage in 'sea' movement. Each barque can carry 100 units of cargo. Barques will not sail with fewer than ten crew. To build a barque, one must have a barquebuilding rating of at least 900 and expend 100 timber, 100 cordage, 100 pitch, 1 sail and 100 coins. The coins are added to the town's wealth. The builder may not use his barquebuilding skill again for ten days minus a number of minutes equal to three times the total of his barquebuilding skill and the town's shipyard structure rating. No maintenance attrition is extracted from a character's first barque. Additional barques deteriorate by one-tenth of one percent each day.
## Blockade
Three types of blockades are possible: market blockades, road blockades and naval blockades. Anyone with one, or more, land troops may institute a road blockade, or a market blockade. Anyone with fully-crewed ships not overloaded with cargo may institute a naval blockade. Blockades apply to anyone who is neither a member of the blockader's family, nor a member of the same League as the blockader. When a market is blockaded, no one to whom it applies may buy goods from the townspeople, nor sell goods to the townspeople. When a road is being blockaded, no one to whom it applies may leave the town in any direction except the one whence he came. When a naval blockade has been established, anyone to whom it applies who arrives at, or leaves from, the town by water is automatically engaged in naval battle with the naval blockader. Blockades last until they are terminated by the blockader, or ended by his departure from the town. A town may have no more than one naval blockade active at any one time. Establishing a blockade ends any pre-existing blockades being conducted by the establisher of the new blockade.
## Caravel
Caravels are ships. Each caravel can carry 500 units of cargo. Caravels will not sail with fewer than 20 crew. To build a caravel, one must have a caravelbuilding rating of at least 900 and expend 300 timber, 300 cordage, 300 pitch, 6 sails and 300 coins. The coins are added to the town's wealth. The builder may not use his caravelbuilding skill again for twenty days minus 3 minutes times the total of his caravelbuilding skill and the town's shipyard structure rating. One's first caravel is free of maintenance attrition. Additional caravels deteriorate by one-tenth of one percent each day.

## Crew
Ships may not move without the required number of crew. Barques require 10 crew, galliots require 20, galleys 100, caravels 20 and roundships 50. To recruit crew, one must expend 20 coins per recruit. Each character may hold 200 crew free of maintenance. Any additional crew require 0.1 units of grain per day in maintenance. If unmaintained, these excess crew suffer one percent attrition per day. Crew do not fight in land battles. 
## Falconet
Falconets are used in maritime battles. They may also be used to meet a town's demand for weapons. To be able to produce falconets, one must expend a total of one saltpeter, one sulfur and one charcoal plus 10 coins and one iron per falconet produced. The coins are added to the town's wealth. The maximum number of falconets one can make at one time is equal to one-tenth of the square root of one's cannonmaking rating. Coins expended to produce a falconet are added to the town's wealth. The falconet maker's cannonmaking rating may not be used again for seven days minus a number of minutes equal to the total of his cannonmaking rating plus the rating of the town's armory structure. When falconets are produced in a town with a pre-existing Armory, that Armory is increased in size by 0.1 points.

## Galley
Galleys are ships. Each galley can carry 2,000 units of cargo. A galley will not sail with fewer than 100 crew. To build a galley, one must have a galleybuilding rating of at least 1,000 and expend 1,000 timber, 1,000 slaves, 1,000 pitch and 1,000 coins. The coins are added to the town's wealth. The builder may not use his galleybuilding skill again for fifty days minus 5 minutes times the total of his galleybuilding skill and the town's shipyard structure rating. One's first galley is free of maintenance attrition. Additional galleys deteriorate by one-tenth of one percent each day.

## Galliot
Galliots are ships. Each galliot can carry 300 units of cargo. Galliots will not sail with fewer than 20 crew. To build a galliot, one must have a galliotbuilding rating of at least 900 and expend 200 timber, 200 slaves, 200 pitch and 200 coins. The coins are added to the town's wealth. The builder may not use his galliotbuilding skill again for twenty days minus 3 minutes times the total of his galliotbuilding skill and the town's shipyard structure rating. One's first galliot is free of maintenance attrition. Additional galliots deteriorate by one-tenth of one percent each day.

## Naval battle
A naval battle takes place when a naval blockade is traversed by someone not belonging to the same League, or family, as the blockader. Naval battles occur in stages. In the first stage, falconets are fired. Three falconets may be fired per galley, two per roundship, one per caravel and one per galliot. Each fired falconet kills a number of enemy troops equal to 100 x N x G, with N being the firer's navigation rating divided by 1,000 and G being the firer's gunnery rating divided by 1,000. Losses are apportioned proportionately among all troop types. (Crew are treated as troops in all aspects of naval battle.) In the next stage, galleys belonging to the combatant with the higher navigation rating ram opposing vessels. Each ramming galley destroys a number of enemy ships equal 1/1,000 of the difference in navigation ratings between the two combatants. Ship losses are apportioned proportionately among the ship types on the rammed side. Should the destruction of shipping leave one side with insufficient capacity to hold all of its troops, the excess troops are lost. In the next stage, each bowman kills a number of opposing troops equal to his commander's navigation rating divided by 1,000 multiplied by the bowmen's morale divided by 1,000. In the next stage, arquebusiers each kill at half the rate of bowmen. The final stage is a melee in which each troop kills a number of enemies equal to 0.3 x Mi/1,000 x N/1,000 x Mo/1,000 (with Mi being military skill and Mo being the weighted average morale for all troops on the killer's side.) After the battle, if the blockade-runner has at least one troop and one ship remaining, he continues on to his destination. Should either participant end up with no troops, or no ships, he ends up in the port town where the battle took place, still in possession of his coins but without his trade goods or troops. If the blockader survives the battle with at least one ship and one troop, the blockade continues. (Naval blockades, however, are terminated during the daily update when the blockader has insufficient crew to man his ships.) Morale is adjusted after the battle. The side that suffered the fewer losses gains a number of morale points equal to 10% of the difference in losses. The other side loses the same number of points. Troops with morale of zero, or less, desert during the next daily update. The maximum morale allowed in naval battles is 3,000. Participants in a naval battle gain two points of navigation skill and one point of military skill. If they fire falconets, they also gain one point of gunnery skill.

## Roundship
Roundships are ships used for 'coastal' and 'sea' transport. They are not allowed to make 'river' moves. Each roundship can carry 1,000 units of cargo. Roundships will not sail with fewer than 50 crew. To build a roundship, one must have a roundshipbuilding rating of at least 1,000 and expend 600 timber, 600 cordage, 600 pitch, 12 sails and 600 coins. The coins are added to the town's wealth. The builder may not use his roundshipbuilding skill again for forty days minus 3 minutes times the total of his roundshipbuilding skill and the town's shipyard structure rating. One's first roundship is free of maintenance attrition. Additional roundships deteriorate by one-tenth of one percent each day.

## Sale
Goods may be sold to towns to meet the town's demand for goods of that category, but goods of a type produced by a town may never be sold to that town. The price received for selling goods to a town is reduced by a percentage equal to the town's import tariff rate. The maximum number of goods that may be sold to a town in one action is equal to 100 plus 100 for possessing a domicile in the town plus a number equal to the size of a strongpoint owned by the seller's family at the town plus 1,000 for being a citizen of the town plus a number equal to the seller's merchantry rating plus one-tenth of the size of the town's Guildhall. When a domicile has a value greater than 100, one additional unit may be sold for each point by which the domicile's size exceeds 100. The gross price paid out is taken from the town's wealth. If the town has insufficient wealth, the transaction must be reduced in size sufficiently to enable the town to pay the gross price. The tariff extracted from the transaction is added to the town's total accumulation of tariff money.

Any number of types of goods of a single category may be sold to a town with the expenditure of a total of one initiative. In such cases, the price received for the second type of good is 10% higher than the basic price. The price received for the third type of good is 20% higher. Each additional type of good receives a price ten percentage points more than the preceding one. The type of goods being sold in the largest quantity must be sold in the first part of the action, then the type of goods being sold in the next largest quantity, then the type of goods being sold in the third largest quantity, etc. To receive the bonus for multiple types of goods, the seller must sell all of the items as part of one action. 

When a character (in one action) sells to a town (with a pre-existing Guildhall) items of every eligible type he holds within a category, the Guildhall increases in size by 0.1 points. 

Goods may be sold to characters outside one's family. This is done through an offer followed by an acceptance. There is a base price for each type of good at each location. The player may offer his goods for sale at that price, for 10% more, or for 10% less. The maximum number of coins that may change hands in one transaction of this type is equal to 1,000 plus the seller's merchantry rating plus his banking rating plus the town's Guildhall rating. Sales may not take place in water zones.

During the daily update, should a town's demand for a category of goods be less than one, then the price offered for that category is reduced by one one-thousandth. Should the demand for a category of goods be greater than 334 times the town's population times the daily increment for that category, then the price offered is increased by one one-thousandth. The quantity of goods in a category is increased each day by a number equal to the population times the daily increment figure. 

## Sheep
Sheep may be used to satisfy a town's demand for food. They move by land without requiring transport. Each character may hold one hundred sheep without having to maintain them. Additional sheep require 0.2 units of grain per day as maintenance. Unmaintained additional sheep suffer one percent attrition per day.
